 Former Transvaal rugby player and bouncer Nigel McGurk told the South Gauteng High Court in graphic detail on Tuesday morning about the plans to shoot former Allan Gray chief investment officer Stephen Mildenhall in August 2005. On day two of the murder trial of mining magnate Brett Kebble in September 2005, for which drug dealer Glenn Agliotti is the only accused in the dock, McGurk said that he, boxer Mikey Schultz and Faizel “Kappie” Smith were paid by Kebble security boss Clinton Nassif to “take Mildenhall out of commission for three of four months”. Kebble trial beginsConvicted drug trafficker Glen Agliotti arrived at the South Gauteng High Court on Monday morning to begin his first day in the dock for his alleged role in the “assisted suicide” of slain mining magnate Brett Kebble.More videos Bumpy road to Cape Town Mildenhall had been in the process of auditing Kebble’s mining companies and may have prevented a loan to them from being approved. The road to Cape Town to carry out the hit was a bumpy one — the trio knocked over a buck, leading to problems with their car’s radiator. Nassif himself had to drive down to Colesberg, where they were booked into a bed and breakfast, to arrange for the towing of the car and rented a red Citi Golf for them to get to Cape Town. Once there, the three sub-contracted two Capetonains, paying them a deposit of R50 000 to shoot Mildenhall. After waiting three days for Mildenhall to leave his house at the address specified, they realised they had the address wrong, and had to find the new one. “There were kids, it was next to a school, so we decided not to carry it out in the morning. Because of all the commotion,” said McGurk. “We received a call from the shooters saying that the job had been done.” Schultz testified on Monday that Mildenhall was shot twice in the shoulders. The shooters gave McGurk Mildenhall’s keys and wallet, which contained his credit card and driver’s licence “to prove that the job had been done”. They cut-up the gun used to shoot Mildenhall and threw it into the sea. On the way back to Johannesburg, McGurk and Smith “made a fire on the side of the road to dispose of the wallet”. Mildenhall has since relocated to the United Kingdom. Earlier on Tuesday Schultz completed his testimony without directly implicating Agliotti in Kebble’s death. Schultz testified that all his instructions and knowledge on the Kebble murder and other matters Agliotti is charged for came from Nassif. Nassif is expected to testify in the trial, which is expected to run for three weeks.